Implementation of Monitoring using Prometheus and Grafana
To monitor the deployed Super Mario application running on the Amazon EKS cluster, Prometheus and Grafana were integrated into the Kubernetes environment.
First, a dedicated namespace called monitoring was created in the Kubernetes cluster to isolate monitoring components.
kubectl create namespace monitoring
Next, Helm repositories for Prometheus and Grafana were added to install the monitoring tools using Helm charts.
helm repo add prometheus-community https://prometheus-community.github.io/helm-charts
helm repo add grafana https://grafana.github.io/helm-charts
helm repo update
Prometheus was then installed in the cluster using Helm. Prometheus collects metrics from Kubernetes nodes and pods using Node Exporter and Kubernetes service discovery.
helm install prometheus prometheus-community/prometheus -n monitoring
This installation deploys several components including:
Prometheus server for metrics collection
Node Exporter for node level metrics
Alertmanager for alert handling
kube-state-metrics for Kubernetes resource metrics
After that, Grafana was installed to visualize the collected metrics.
helm install grafana grafana/grafana -n monitoring
Grafana was configured to use Prometheus as a data source. This allows Grafana to query metrics collected by Prometheus and display them in dashboards.
To access the Grafana dashboard externally, the Grafana service was exposed using a NodePort service.
kubectl expose service grafana --type=NodePort --target-port=3000 --name=grafana-service -n monitoring
The NodePort assigned by Kubernetes allows access to the Grafana web interface through the EC2 public IP and the NodePort.
After logging into Grafana, Prometheus was added as a data source using the following service endpoint:
http://prometheus-server.monitoring.svc.cluster.local
Finally, Grafana dashboards were imported to visualize Kubernetes metrics such as CPU usage, memory usage, disk utilization, network I/O, and pod level metrics. These dashboards provide real time monitoring of the Super Mario application running in the Kubernetes cluster.
This setup enables centralized monitoring of the Kubernetes infrastructure and the deployed application, helping track performance and resource utilization effectively.
